
--- PAGE 1 ---
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526
 
 
 
The Entropy Theory of Mind and Behavioral Finance 
 
 
 
   Jing Chen 
School of Business 
University of Northern British Columbia 
Prince George, BC 
Canada V2N 4Z9 
Phone: 1-250-960-6480 
Email: chenj@unbc.ca 
Web:   http://web.unbc.ca/~chenj/ 
 
  
January, 2011 
  
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
 
Rapid accumulation of empirical studies in behavioral finance calls for a unified and 
consistent theoretical synthesis. Instead of building up a behavioral theory of economics 
directly, we present th e entropy theory of mind, which is an economic theory of mind. 
Then we integrate the value and cost of information processing into the overall picture in 
economic decision making.  The entropy theory of mind  includes a theory of judgment, 
which provides a c ommon framework to integrate behavioral and informational theories 
of investment. The theory of judgment provides a quantitative link between investors‟ 
judgment and their trading activities.   It offers a simple and unified understanding of 
major patterns in market activities and investor behaviors.  As an application, a simple 
mathematical model based on the entropy theory of mind is constru cted to understand 
many empirical patterns related to the cycles of momentum and reversals in asset 
markets. During various phases of the cycles, trading volumes and trading behaviors of 
investors of different sizes often show distinct characteristics. It has been a long standing 
challenge to describe the multiple patterns simultaneously from a quantitative theory. In 
this paper, we show that the predictions derived from the model are consistent with the multiple 
empirical patterns of trading volumes and investor activities at the different phases of the cycle of 
momentum and reversal.   
 
 
 
 
We thank helpful comments from participants from a behavioral finance course at UNBC.  
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 2 ---
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526
 1 
Rapid accumulation of empirical studies in behavioral finance calls for a unified and consistent 
theoretical synthesis. At the same time, increasingly sophisticated techniques employed in 
empirical studies enable us to test the validity of propositions derived from different theories on 
the human mind. In this paper, we present an updated version of the recently developed entropy 
theory of the human mind. The theory shows that commo n psychological patterns are  
consequences of the constraints of the physical laws and the economic principle that for any 
biological systems to be viable, the benefits of any activities, including mental activities, have to 
be higher than their costs. It contains a mathem atical theory on the value and bias of judgment, 
which provides a common framework to integrate behavioral and informational theories of 
investment. The theory of judgment provides a quantitative link between investors‟ judgment and 
their trading activities. As a result, it offers a simple and unified understanding of major patterns 
in market activities and investor behaviors.   
 
Before we discuss the details of human mind, we may reflect  on a simple and obvious fact: t he 
sizes of our brains are much smalle r than the world we try to comprehend. This fact alone 
determines that our brain can only store and process a tiny fraction of information that is available 
in the world. Our brains also work under a tight energy budget. The energy consumption of our 
brains is less than a typical light bulb that lights our rooms. For comparison, Google‟s search 
engines consume  more electricity than a million typical households. Mind, as a product of 
biological evolution, is subject to the economic principle that its cost mu st be lower than its 
benefit. It would not be economical for the mind to develop capacities to detect less general 
activities. Indeed, human beings have only limited capacities to detect many frequently occurring 
events. Our eyes can detect only very narro w ranges of electromagnetic waves. We don‟t have 
sense organs to detect electric fields, while some fish do. Our sense of smell is highly 
degenerated. Since it is costly to develop and maintain information processing capacity, only the 
most frequently occu rring events that are most relevant to our survival will be detected by our 
senses and processed by our mind. The constraints of size and energy consumption of human 
brain determine that we only have very limited attention capacity, which is a major assumption in 
behavioral finance theories.  
  
Among many functions of  mind, the most important one is to identify resources at low cost. 
While the forms of resources are diverse, most resources can be understood from a unifying 
principle. A system has a tendency  to move from a less probable state to a more probable state. 
This tendency of directional movement is what drives, among other things, living organisms.   
Intuitively, resources are something that is of low probability, or scarce. The measure of 
probability of a system is called entropy in physics. In a formal language, systems move from low 
entropy state to high entropy state. This is the second law of thermodynamics , the most universal 
law of the nature. The second law is often understood from an equilibr ium perspective, rendering 
entropy an image of waste and death. However, from the non -equilibrium perspective, the 
entropy flow, which is manifested as heat flow, light flow, electricity flow, water flow and many 
other forms, is the fountain of life. Since  all living organisms need to tap into the entropy flow 
from the environment for survival, it is inevitable that the mind, including the human mind, is 
evolved to identify entropy as the most important concept. Most important valuations in life are 
centered on entropy and related concepts. When information, which we collect for our survival, is 
represented mathematically by the entropy function, major problems in information theory can be 
resolved very easily (Shannon, 1948).  
 
The definitions of entropy by  Boltzmann and Shannon are mathematically equivalent. However, 
Shannon‟s definition intuitively represents the cost and value of information processing. As a 
result, Shannon‟s theory has been applied to many different fields. Since human brain is a 
physical communication and decision system, it is natural that the entropy theory of information 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 3 ---
 2 
can be applied to understand human mind (Chen, 2003, 2005). In the following, we will  discuss 
three properties of the entropy theory of mind that are most relevant to behavioral finance.  
 
First, information is costly and information with higher value is in general more costly to obtain. 
From Maxwell‟s (1871) thought experiment on an intelligent demon, information with higher 
physical value will have higher physical cost. Furthermore, physical cost is highly correlated with 
economic cost (Georgescu-Roegen, 1971 and Chen, 2005). In engineering projects, the entropy 
function, which is the measure of value of information, is often used to estimate the costs of 
projects (Ku llback, 1959). Hence information of high economic value is in general of high 
economic costs. This result helps understand the systematic differences in the trading patterns of 
large and small investors. Depending on the value of assets under management, d ifferent 
investors will choose different methods of information gathering with different costs. Large 
investors are willing to pay a high cost to collect and analyze fundamental  information. Small 
investors will spend less cost or effort on information gat hering and rely mainly on easy to 
understand low cost information such as coverage from popular media and technical signals. 
Empirical works  confirm that institutional investors trade on fundamental information while 
individual investors trade  on price tre nds and news (Cohen, Gompers and Vuolteenaho,  2002; 
Barber and Odean, 2008; Engelberg and Parsons, 2009).  
 
The differences in information processing by large and small investors generate the differences in 
their trading behaviors. There is a time lag betw een firm activities , such as R&D and project 
construction, and profit realization. By engaging in costly research, large investors are in a better 
position to estimate the values of new projects before they turn profitable and are better at 
separating long term components from short term fluctuation in earning data . Small investors, 
lacking detailed  information on firm activities, have to rely on realized earning figures to assess 
firm values or observe the stock price movement to infer the trading  activi ties of the informed. 
Since the stock transactions by individual investors are often triggered by public media, they 
sometimes are highly correlated (Barber, Odean and Zhu, 2009b). On average, large investors 
buy at an earlier stage when stock prices are r ising and sell at an earlier stage when stock prices 
are falling than the small investors (Hvidkjaer 2006; Chen, Moise and Zhao,2009 ). As a result, 
large investors as a group make money and small investors as a group lose money from their 
trading activities (Wermers, 2000; Barber and Odean, 2000; Cronqvist and Thaler, 2004). Chen, 
Jegadeesh and Wermers (2000) documented that shares bought by mutual fund managers 
outperform shares they sold. Odean (1999) documented that the shares individual investors sold 
outperform the shares they bought. The heterogeneity of information processing and resulting 
trading activities by different investors is the main reason behind the observed patterns in the 
asset markets.  
 
Second, the description of investor behaviors and market patterns can be refined by the theory of 
judgment, which is a natural  extension from the information theory . Kelly(1956) developed the 
link between information investors received and their trading decisions.  In most time , people 
have to make subjective assessment of events without possessing complete information. The 
theory of judgment provides a measure to value one‟s judgment. The valuation of a judgmen t is 
against a reference state, which is usually taken to be the maximum entropy equilibrium stat e 
(Jaynes, 1988). Since no additional information is required to determine the equilibrium state, the 
value of judgment from th e decision making perspective can be naturally measured against the 
equilibrium state. However, the reference state can be a non -equilibrium steady state , such as a 
bubble state . Intuitively, if one buys a stock at two dollars and the equilibrium price is five 
dollars, then the value of your buying is three dollars. However, if the stock price can be 
momentarily moved to six dollars and you can take advantage of this high price, then the value of 
your buying is four dollars. Mathematically, the value of judgment is the average of profit or loss 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 4 ---
 3 
under different scenarios, which can be represented by a function generalized from relativ e 
entropy.  
 
The value of judgment is always lower than or equal to the value of information with the same 
objective probability distribution and reference state. The value of judgment is equal to the value 
of information only when the subjective assessmen t of the probability distribution is identical to 
the objective probability distribution. Therefore, the concept of judgment is a generalization from 
the concept of i nformation when a person does not  have precise estimation of a random event, 
which is the case in most decision making processes. The difference between the values of 
judgment and information , or equivalently, the difference between actual cost of information 
processing and the lowest possible cost, is  bias, which is defined by a mathematical f unction 
called relative entropy.  Entropy and relative entropy are the two most important functions in 
information theory and statistical mechanics (Kullback, 1959; Schlögl, 1989; Cover and Thomas, 
2005; Qian, 2001, 2009). Unlike the value of information, w hich is always positive, the value of 
judgment can be either positive or negative. This means that the value of active trading by 
investors can be either positive or negative. Trading that earn positive returns are generally 
attributed to information while  trading that earn negative returns are generally attributed to 
behavioral biases. From the theory of judgment, the same judgment will have different values at 
different times due to changes of environmental parameters. Empirical evidences show that small 
individual investors often execute trades similar to those by large institutional investors but at a 
later stage. This could due to behavioral biases, or due to the difficulty of small investors to 
obtain timely information.  
 
Under certain conditions, a judgment that is more biased may be more valuable than a less biased 
judgment. Suppose two investors are moderately favorable to two different stocks and each buys 
moderately amount of shares of respective stock. Subsequently, one stock performs very well and 
the other performs moderately well. Then the judgment of the investor who bought the stock that 
performs well is more biased. At the same time, the return from his investment is higher. This 
shows that value and bias of judgment are two distinct concept s. It will help clarify discussion in 
behavioral literature, which often identifies bias with low value of judgment. The theory of 
judgment bridges the chasm between the concept of information and cognitive bias. This will 
help provides a common framework for behavioral and informational perspectives in 
understanding financial market.  
 
Investment decisions are made according to investors‟ judgment about returns of different assets. 
To establish a precise link between investors‟ judgment and investment retu rn, we consider a 
simple market with only two assets: a risk free asset and a risky asset. Based on the subjective 
assessment of the return distribution of the risky asset, an investor can determine the optimal 
portion of the risky asset in the portfolio and calculate the expected rate of return of this portfolio.  
We prove that the first order approximation of the expected rate of return of the portfolios 
constructed from a judgment is equal to the value of the same judgment. Therefore, the theory of 
judgment provides a quantitative link between the value of a judgment and  the expected rate  of 
return of the portfolio constructed from the same judgment. In a broader sense, the theory of 
judgment provides a link between ideas and their monetary values.  
 
Since the judgment about the performance of a stock determines the level of holding about the  
stock, the change of judgment about a stock determines the volume of trading in the market, 
which is considered as the key ingredient missing from the asset pricing m odels (Banerjee and 
Kremer, 2010 ). The theory of judgment  provides a  simple and intuitive  tool to model  trading 
volume in the asset market.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 5 ---
 4 
Third, the entropy theory of mind provides a simple mathematical model for a unified  
understanding of  learning and  human psychology. From the information theory, the cost of 
information processing depends on the relation between the structure of information sources and 
the structure of the coding system that transmit information. When the structure of coding system 
becomes more similar to the structure of the information sources that are to be transmitted, the 
average signal length will becomes lower. In other words, information processing is more 
efficient when the coding system represents the information sources more  precisely. However, a 
more refined and specialized coding system performs poorly compared with a generic coding 
system when transmitting information without specific structures or with structures very different 
from the coding system. This tradeoff holds the key to understand human psychology and 
learning.  
 
If certain events are common in the environment, it is economical to learn about them and 
represent them with shorter signals so mind can respond to them faster. When certain patterns 
persist for many generations, learning about these patterns is often transformed into more 
permanent structures in mind through epigenetic and genetic means so each generation does not 
have to relearn from scratch (Jablonka and Lamb, 2006; Rando 
 and
  Verstrepen, 2007).  These 
more permanent patterns of responses form the innate psychology. Learning and innat e 
psychology complement each other. Learning is more costly but more flexible. Innate psychology 
is less costly but less flexible. Together, they provide us a coding system that lowers the average 
cost in information processing than an unstructured generic  code in most situations that are 
important to us. This integrated understanding of learning and human psychology will help us 
understand many patterns reported in behavioral finance literature and their evolution over time. 
Human psychology and past learning determine that decisions by investors in particular moments 
may not be optimal, especially with the benefit of hindsight. Learning also determines that a 
particular bias, if discovered and economically significant enough, will gradually reduce due to 
adaptation and competition. However, the learning processes can be complex and prolonged. For 
example, trend following has been a popular tr ading strategy for a long time. But the research on 
momentum has kept uncovering new and sometimes surprising quantit ative results (Novy-Marx, 
2009; Chen, Moise and Zhao,2009) . Furthermore, not all types of misevaluations of securities 
will decline overtime, since many misevaluations benefit major stakeholders who often are the 
best informed.   
 
Many behavioral theories have been proposed to understand financial anomalies  (Brav and 
Heaton, 2002). Instead of developing a behavioral theory of economics directly, we propose an 
economic theory of behavior. Then we integrate the value and cost of information processing into 
the overall picture in economic decision making. The entropy theory of mind has been applied to 
understand many empirical patterns in behavioral finance (Chen, 2003, 2004, 2007). In this paper, 
we will apply the theory to understand empirical patterns related to the cycles of momentum and 
reversal. A persistent pattern in the security market is the price continuation in short to medium 
run and the reversal of return in the long run (DeBondt and Thaler, 1985; Jegadeesh and Titman, 
1993). Several models have be en developed to explain this pattern (Barberis, Shleifer and 
Vishny,1998; Daniel, Hirshleifer a nd Subrahmanyam,1998; Hong and S tein,1999). However, 
these models could not explain other patterns related to the cycles of momentum and reversal 
(Lee and Swamin athan, 2000; Hvidkjaer, 2006). For example, the return patterns are often 
accompanied by distinct patterns of trading volume. However, “existing theories of investor 
behavior do not fully account for all of the evidence. … none of these models incorporate trading 
volume explicitly and, therefore, they cannot fully explain why trading volume is able to predict 
the magnitude and persistence of future price momentum.” (Lee and Swaminathan, 2000, p. 
2066)  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 6 ---
 5 
The value of judgment provides a quantitative measure of the level of informedness of the 
investors.  In our model, investors are classified into three groups as large, midsized and small 
investors according to their wealth. The proportion of people in each group is determined by the 
maximum entropy principle. The level of informedness of each group of investors are determined 
by or positively correlated to their level of the wealth. The judgments of the investors about the 
future movement of the prices of the risky assets determine the level of their holdings. During the 
cycles of the information processing, different investors, because of their different capacity in 
information processing, hold different portions of the risky asset. The changes of judgment about 
the risky asset by differently informed investo rs over time determine the trading behaviors of 
different groups of investors, the volume of trading and the direction and magnitude of asset price 
changes at different phases of cycles.  The theoretical predictions generated by this quantitative 
model are very similar to empirical patterns recorded in Lee and Swaminathan, (2000), Hvidkjaer 
(2006) and others.  
 
This paper is an update and extension from earlier works Chen (2003, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2008). 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides a reflection on the various 
aspects of the concept of entropy that are relevant to further discussion. Section 2  develops a 
general theory of innate psychological patterns  and learning as means to reduce the cost of 
information processing .  Section 3  presents the theory of judgment. Section 4  discusses how 
investors‟ judgments determine their trading decisions and the returns of their portfolios. Section 
5 builds a quantitative model based on the theory of judgment and show s the predictions derived 
from the model are consistent with multiple empirical patterns related to the cycles of momentum 
and reversal. Section 6 concludes.  
 
 
1. The Concept of Entropy: A Reflection  
 
 
More than any other scientific theory, thermodynamics was evolved directly  from the attempts to 
improve the efficiency in economic activities. Thermodynamics, and statistical mechanics, which 
is the micro foundation of thermodynamics, are the economic theory of nature and human 
societies.  In the early days of research in thermodynamics, people focused on the quantities such 
as work and heat, which are intuitive to our senses. However, the amounts of work and heat 
transfer are path dependent, which makes it difficult to detect general patterns. In mid nineteenth 
century, Rudolf Clausius introduced the concept of entropy, which is a state variable and hence 
not path dependent. His work may remind us about path dependency in economics, which is often 
said to be the reason why economic activities can not be described by a universal theory. In fact, 
researchers in science are faced with the same problems. The challenge is to find state variables, 
which are path independent, so the efficiencies of different path dependent activities  can be 
compared. 
 
 
Shortly after the introduction of t he concept of entropy, Boltzmann linked entropy, S, a  
macroscopic quantity, to W, the number of microscopic states with the formula 
 
 
                                                                                           logWkS   
 
We will derive the mathematical equivalence between the definitions of entropy by Boltzmann 
and Shannon, which will be important for us to understand the relation between information and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 7 ---
 6 
physical entropy. Suppose a system has N particles, of which, ni particles are in ith state, i = 1, 2, 
…,k. Then  
 
 

 !
!
in
NW  
where 
 
 

i
inN  
Taking the logarithm of W, we have 
 
 

i
inNW !log!loglog  
Then using Stirling‟s theorem, we obtain 
 
 
)log(          
)log(log          
logloglogloglog


 



i
ii
i
i
i
i
ii
i i
iii
N
n
N
nN
nN
nNN
nnNNnnnNNNW  
 
Let 
 
 
kiN
np i
i ,...2,1for               
 
Then 
 
 
)log(log 
i
ii ppNW  
 
and  
 
(1)                                                                 )log(log 
i
ii ppkNWkS  
  
Since 
 
 

i
ii pp log  
 
is defined as information by Shannon (1948), t his establishes the mathematical relation between 
physical entropy and information . In the following, we will discuss an often cited passage from 
Arrow that has played a prominent role in defining the sc ope of application of entropy theory in 
the field of economic analysis. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 8 ---
 7 
The well -known Shannon measure which has been so useful in communications 
engineering is not in general appropriate for economic analysis because it gives no 
weight to the value of th e information. If beforehand a large manufacturer regards it as 
equally likely whether the price of his product will go up or down, then learning which is 
true conveys no more information, in the Shannon sense, than observing the toss of a fair 
coin. (Arrow, 1973 (1983), p. 138) 
 
 
From (1), the physical and economic value s of information are determined by three factors. The 
first factor is  
 
 

i
ii pp log  
which is the Shannon information. It measures information value per symbol or per unit of 
output. The second factor is N. In physics, it represents the number of particles in a system. In 
information theory, it represents the number of symbols in information transmission. For 
example, in Shannon (1948), there is a formula 
 
 
mHH   
 
“where m is the average number of symbols produced per second. H or H’ measures the amount 
of information generated by source per symbol or per second.  (Shannon and Weaver, p. 23) ” In 
economics, it represents the quantity of output. The third factor is k. It is a coefficient that 
converts value of one scale into another. In physics, it is the Boltzmann constant. In economics, it 
is the monetary value per unit of output. If the output is of high value, k is large. If the output is of 
low value, k is small. 
 
It is not  surprising that Arrow made such  a simple mistake. Everyone makes simple mistakes. 
Many people must have spotted the error and some of them, such as Chen (2005), have pointed it 
out publicly. However, it is a telling sign that a statement conta ining such an obvious error has 
been cited or quoted as the final word on such important issue for so many years  and anyone who 
points out the error is simply ignored.  
 
Soon after Shannon developed the entropy theory of information, many attempts were mad e to 
give information more intuitive meaning. Kelly (1956) applied the information theory to 
investment decisions when investors have the knowledge of probability distribution of asset 
returns. He showed that the maximum exponential rate of return of an in vestor‟s asset is equal to 
the rate of information transmission. This result provides an economic meaning to the measure of 
information. Kelly suggested that the economic interpretation of information theory “can actually 
be used to analyze nearly any bran ch of human endeavor (Kelly, 1956, p. 9 18)”. Mathematically, 
the entropy based criterion is equivalent to maximization of geometric mean or logarithmic utility 
in portfolio investment (Latane , 1959; McEnally, 1986). T he theory is very intuitive and 
practical. The entropy based investment theory has been successfully applied to investment 
practice (Thorp, 1997; Poundstone, 2005). Poundstone (2005) provided a detailed account on the 
interaction between the information theory based investment theory and academ ic economists.   
“Calling the Kelly system a “fallacy,” he (Samuelson) helped persuade most economists to reject 
it. (Poundstone, 2005)” As Samuelson (1969) offered no substantial argument against the theory 
of Kelly and others, it is difficult for many to understand why he took such a strong view about it. 
But Samuelson‟s position was consistent with his general attitude toward the use of entropy in the 
social sciences: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 9 ---
 8 
 
And I may add that the sign of a crank or half -baked speculator in the social sciences  is 
his search for something in the social system that corresponds to the physicist‟s notion of 
“entropy”. (Samuelson, 1972, p. 450) 
 
A distinct characteristic of the entropy based investment theory or geometric mean method is that 
it provides an objective criterion. In a scientific theory, an objective criterion  is usually regarded 
as a good criterion. However, the conventional economic theories assume  that human being s 
possess subjective utilities and subjective sensations, which make objective criterions less useful. 
So it will be helpful to investigate the concept of utility and sensation. Bernoulli‟s (1738(1954)) 
paper is regarded as the first paper on utility. The utility function derived from his paper is a 
logarithmic function. The relation between s ubjective sensation and objective stimulation has 
been extensively investigated by Fechner. “If Fechner‟s psychophysics could be said to have an 
inverse square law, it was the logarithmic law relating sensation and stimulus (Reiz):  
 
 
RCS log  
 
… Fechner‟s work was in some respects more closely related to Ohm‟s early investigations of 
current. Indeed, Ohm … had developed essentially the same empirical formula V = mlog(1+x) for 
the relation between the loss of force of current V and length of wire x.” (Stigler, 1986, p. 243)  
 
In a section called Can Perceptions Be Quantified? Maor (1994) noted, “Among the many 
phenomena that follow a logarithmic scale, we should also mention the decibel scale of loudness, 
the brightness scale of stellar magnitude, and the Richie scale measuring intensity of earthquakes. 
(p. 113)” The specific results about the relation between sensation and stimulus can be complex 
(Stevens, 1961). However, empirical evidence  overwhelmingly supports that subjective utilities  
and sensations are strongly related to objective stimulus and measurements. Furthermore, 
maximization of logarithmic utility or geometric mean is a dominant strategy under very general 
conditions (McEnally, 1986; Sinn, 2003 ). This is not to suggest that individual feelings and 
sensations are identical. The very opposite is true. We can discuss Newtonian mechanics as a 
parallel. All mechanical systems can be described by the basic laws of Newtonian mechanics. 
However, the movements of different mechanical syste ms can be very different and very 
complex. Because each person‟s neural system is unique by birth and uniquely calibrated by 
environmental stimulus, identical external stimulus may generate diverse sensations. What we 
suggest is that the entropy theory of mind provides a foundation to understand these complex 
sensations. In earlier works, we show that the entropy theory of mind provides a simple and 
consistent explanation to many psychological patterns (Chen, 2003, 2005). Theories of mind from 
similar perspectives have been developed by other researchers (Jaynes, 1988; Friston, 2010). This 
shows the broad appeal of understanding the mind from physical and economic perspectives.     
 
It is interesting to note the relation between entropy and the research community. Soon after the 
introduction of the concept of entropy, researchers recognized entropy as a fundamental quantity. 
Therefore it seems natural for entropy to be used as a coordinate in understanding thermodynamic 
problems. However, quantities such as v olume and pressure, which are more intuitive to 
understand, are used as coordinates most of the time. Gibbs thought: 
 
The method in which the co -ordinates represent volume and pressure has a certain 
advantage in the simple and elementary character of the notions upon which it is based … 
On the other hand, a method involving the notion of entropy, the very existence of which 
depends upon the second law of thermodynamics, will doubtless seem to many far -
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 10 ---
 9 
fetched, and may repel beginners as obscure and difficul t of comprehension. This 
inconvenience is perhaps more than counterbalanced by the advantages of a method 
which makes the second law of thermodynamics so prominent, and gives it so clear and 
elementary an expression. (Gibbs, 1873a (1906), p. 11) 
 
By using entropy as a coordinate, Gibbs was able to conceive the concept of free energy, one of 
the most important concepts in thermodynamics (Gibbs, 1873b (1906)). However, current 
textbooks on thermodynamics continue to use volume and pressure as coordinate syste ms instead 
of entropy. This is a common pattern in many research works. The concept of entropy is crucial 
in developing many important scientific ideas, such as Planck‟s quantum theory and Einstein‟s 
photon theory ( Jammer, 1966; Einstein, 1905 (1989)). But in standard textbooks, the concept of 
entropy plays a minor role or is not mentioned when  introducing these ideas.  This is because 
entropy, which cannot be directly measured by our sensory systems, is difficult to communicate.  
 
The above discussion show s the dual personality of entropy. It explains why the concept of 
entropy is behind so many scientific breakthroughs . It also explains why entropy is usually 
abandoned or its scope of application is restricted after the breakthroughs are established. The 
most prominent example is from Shannon himself. Shortly after Shannon (1948) developed the 
entropy theory of information, Weaver commented: “ Thus when one meets the concept of 
entropy in communication theory, he has a right to be rather excited --- a right to suspect that one 
has hold of something that may turn out to be basic and important.” (Shannon and Weaver, 1949, 
p. 13)  This sense of excitement attracted a lot of attempts to apply the concept of entropy to 
many other areas. As it is often the case, earlier attempts to apply some promising intuition do not 
yield concrete results easily. In an editorial, Shannon tried to discourage the jumping on the 
bandwagon: 
 
Workers in other fields should realize that that the basic results of the subject are aimed at 
a very specific direction, a direction that is not necessarily relevant to such fields as 
psychology, economics, and other social sciences. Indeed, the hard core of information 
theory is essentially, a branch of mathematics, a strictly deductive system. (Shannon, 
1956) 
  
Since Shannon‟s statement, the entropy theory of information has been applied to many different 
fields. Many of these applications are now part of the standard textbooks in information theory, 
such as (Cover and Thomas, 2006). However, Sh annon‟s statement is still been invoked 
frequently to discredit attempts to apply the entropy theory of information to new fields. The best 
way to honor Shannon is to repeal his statement, which has not stood the test of time, so his 
original ideas can be applied to broader fields.  
 
  
2. Learning  and Psychological Patterns as Means of Reducing the Cost of  Information 
Processing 
 
 
Researchers observe that the human mind do es not process different signals at the same speed. 
“In general, instances of large classes are recalled better and faster than instances of less frequent 
classes; that likely occurrences are easier to imagine than unlikely ones; and that the associative 
connections between events are strengthened when the events frequently co -occur” (Tversky and 
Kahneman, 1974, p.1128). Similarly, in languages, not all words are of the same length. In 
general, more frequently used words are shorter than less frequently used words. For instance, in 
the sentence, “I eat sausage.” the word “I” has only one let ter and the word “sausage” has seven 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 11 ---
 10 
letters. This pattern develops because “I” is used much more frequently than “sausage”. When a 
concept becomes more frequently used, the word representing it often gets shortened. For 
example, automobile becomes car; bi cycle becomes bike; television set becomes television and 
then simply TV; personal computer becomes PC. By representing high probability events with 
shorter expressions, we reduce the time and effort in information transmission. Therefore, 
language is not a purely random mapping from the concrete worlds to the abstract symbols. It is a 
highly structured coding system that reduces the average length of messages.   
 
Since languages are highly structured coding systems, even after messages are enciphered, some  
hidden structures remain. It is through the detection of these hidden structures that people tried to 
decipher these messages. The modern information theory was largely born out of attempts to 
decipher encrypted messages (Beutelspacher, 1994; Boone, 2005) . Many pioneers in information 
theory, such as Alan Turing, Claude Shannon and Solomon Kullback, were involved in war time 
effort in breaking enemy cryptosystems. It is interesting to note that many successful traders in 
the financial markets are originally trained in the filed of information theory (Patterson, 2010).  
 
In the following, we will provide a more quantitative discussion on how coding systems affect the 
cost of information processing.  We will begin with some general discussion and then present  a 
numerical example.   
 
Suppose a random variable, X, has n discrete states {x1, x2, …,xn}, with probability {p1, …pn}. The 
lower bound for the cost of information transmission is the entropy of the random variable . 
Mathematically, the lower bound is  
  



n
j
jj pp
1
                                                                       )ln(  
 
where {p1, …p n}is the probability distribution of the random variable. The actual cost of 
information transmission by a coding system can be measured by  
 
 
  



n
j
jj qp
1
(2)                                                                            )ln(  
 
where {p1, …p n}is the probability distribution of the random variable and  {q1, … q n}is the 
subjective assessment of the probability distribution of the random variable when we desi gn the 
coding system. Formula ( 2) may be called the generalized entropy function . It reaches minimum 
if and only if each  
 
 
njpq jj  1                             ,  
  
  
The purpose of encoding is to lower the cost of communication by accurately assessing the 
probability distribution of random variables. However, probability distributions of random 
variables may not be stationary. A coding system optimized from past data may not provide low 
cost communication in the future. To make the analysis more concrete, we will discuss a 
numerical example adapted from Shannon (1948). Suppose a random variable can generate four 
states, which are called state 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. A generic binary coding can be designed 
with the following mapping: 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 12 ---
 11 
11)4(
10)3(
01)2(
00)1(




C
C
C
C
 
 
The coding has an average length per symbol of two. This corresponds to the maximum 
entropy of four random letters, which is 
 
 
2)4
1log(4
1)4
1log(4
1)4
1log(4
1)4
1log(4
1   
 
Assume that, through experience, we learned that the probabilities of four states are 
 
 
8
1)4(
8
1)3(
4
1)2(
2
1)1(




xP
xP
xP
xP  
 
The entropy of the random variable with the above probability distribution is 
 
 
75.1))8
1log((8
1))8
1log((8
1))4
1log((4
1))2
1log((2
1)( xH  
 
From the information theory, the shortest possible average length of binary code per symbol can 
be as low as 1.75. Such a code exists with the following mapping.  
 
 
111)4(
110)3(
10)2(
0)1(




C
C
C
C  
 
We can confirm the average length of this coding by calculating 
 
 
75.138
138
124
112
1   
 
This shows that learning can help us reduce the cost of informa tion processing. From the 
information theory, in a code with shortest average length, the code length of events with 
probability p should be close to –logp. In this case    
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 13 ---
 12 
 
3)8
1log(
2)4
1log(
1)2
1log(


  
 
The lengths of the codes designed are consistent with this criterion.  
 
Now assume there is a fundamental change in the probability distribution of four states. The new 
probabilities become 
  
 
2
1)4(
4
1)3(
8
1)2(
8
1)1(




xP
xP
xP
xP  
 
If the coding system remains the same, the average length of code per symbol becomes  
 
 
625.232
134
128
118
1   
 
which is longer than 2, the average length of generic code that can be designed without any 
knowledge about the probability distribution of the states. Therefore, knowledge gained from past 
experience may hinder instead of helping information processing when environment change 
substantially or when we attempt new tasks that are very different from earlier experiences.  
 
The ave rage length of code per symbol also can be calculated from the generalized entropy 
function as  
 
 
625.2)8
1log(2
1)8
1log(4
1)4
1log(8
1)2
1log(8
1
2222   
 
which is the same as calculating average length of coding directly. 
 
 
The above discussion  shows that the cost of information process ing is low when a state with 
probability p is represented by a symbol of length about –log p. When p is large, -log p is small. 
This is consistent with the empirical regularity that more frequently occurred events are recalled 
faster than the less frequent ly occurred events. In particular, a coding system that is a good 
representative of the information source has a lower cost of information processing than a generic 
coding system which does not require specific knowledge of the information sources. According 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 14 ---
 13 
to Shannon, “The transducer which does the encoding should match the source to the channel in a 
statistical sense  (Shannon and Weaver, p.  31)”. Therefore it is economical to learn about the 
environment and develop coding systems accordingly. However, a more refined and specialized 
coding system performs poorly compared with a generic coding system when transmitting 
information without specific structures or with structures very different from the coding system. 
The choice of coding systems and their life  spans depends on how persistent the environments 
are.  
 
For short term patterns, we often depend on learning to calibrate our mind temporarily. If certain 
patterns are stable in the environment for many generations, knowledge about them is often 
transformed into more permanent structures in mind through epigenetic and genetic means so 
each generation does not have to relearn from scratch at an additional cost (Jablonka and Lamb, 
2006; Rando 
 and
  Verstrepen, 2007) .  There is no dichotomy between innate psychology  and 
learning, or between nature and nurture . Instead, they form a contin uous spectrum in phenotypic 
plasticity. In general, the problems that occur often in life are easier to learn than problems that 
occur less often; the psychological patterns that evolve earlier from our ancestors are stronger 
than the psychological patterns that evolve later.  
 
“In general, ideal or near ideal encoding requires a long delay in the transmitter and receiver 
(Shannon and Weaver, p. 31)”. The exact length of delay for ideal encoding depends on the 
persistence of statistical patterns. The requirement fo r delay in encoding presents a tradeoff 
between efficiency and flexibility. For coding to be efficient, a long delay is required to 
accurately measure the statistical distribution of random processes. However, random processes 
are not always stationary. Th e longer delay in encoding, the slower a system responds to 
structural changes in random processes. In statistics, this corresponds to the tradeoff between type 
I and type II errors. An attempt to reduce one type of error will increase another type of erro r. In 
human psychology, this corresponds to conservatism and overreaction. An attempt to reduce one 
type of bias will increase the likelihood of another bias. In light of this understanding, should we 
continue to call these psychological patterns biases? 
 
This section discusses learning and human psychology as tools to reduce the cost of information 
processing. In the next section, we will measure the value and bias of our judgment, which we 
make based on the information we receive.  
 
 
3. Value and Bias of Judgment   
  
 
Suppose a random variable, X, has n discrete states {x1, x2, …,xn}, with probability {p1, …pn}. The 
subjective judgment of a person may differ from the objective probability. Suppose the subjective 
judgment of the probability distribution is {q1, … q n}, then the level of uncertainty of judgment 
on each qi, is  
      
 
The total uncertainty of judgment of a random event is the average of uncertainty of judgment of 
each state, weighted by the objective probability distribution of the random event.  
 
                              1for                                  ln)( i niqqH i 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 15 ---
 14 
 
                                                                                     )ln(   
1



n
j
jj qp  
 
We will compare the uncertainty of the judgment against that of a reference probability 
distribution of a reference state. The reference state can be the equilibrium state, or a non -
equilibrium steady state. Take a simple exa mple of binary states of up and down in the stock 
market. Let {p, 1-p} represent the probability of up and down of market in the next period. If on 
average, stocks are up 55% of the time and down 45% of the time, {0.55, 0.45} represent the 
equilibrium state and {0.3, 0.7} represent a non -equilibrium state, which has a higher probability 
to go down than to go up in the next period. Suppose the reference probability distribution of a 
random event is {r1, …rn}. Then the total level of uncertainty of the reference state is  
 
  
  )ln( 
1



n
j
jj rp  
 
The value of judgment can be defined as the reduction of uncertainty from the reference state, 
which is  
 
   (3)                           )(ln   )ln( - )ln(r)q,V(p, 
111



n
j j
j
j
n
j
jj
n
j
jj
r
q
pqprp
 
 
The right hand side of Formula (3) is a function generalized from relative entropy.  We will call it 
generalized relative entropy. When each  
 
  
njpq jj  1                             ,  
 
The value of judgment becomes the value of information.  
 
 
(4)                                                                                                   )(ln
1


n
j j
j
j
r
p
p  
 
From Gibbs inequality (Gibbs, 1902), 
 
                                                   )ln()ln(
11



n
j
jj
n
j
jj qppp
 
 
Therefore, the value of judgment is always less than or equal to the value of information with the 
same probability distribution and reference distribution. 
  
In practice the reference probability distribution { r1, …r n} is often understood as the maximum 
entropy distribution under known constraints. When there is no known constraints, the maximum 
entropy distribution is {1/n, … 1/n} and Formula (3) becomes 
 
 
(5)                                                                          ln  ln),(
1
nqpqpV
n
j
jj  
   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 16 ---
 15 
 
The value of judgment can be positive or negative. This means that active trading by investors 
can increase or decrease the value of their investment portfolios. The distance between the 
objective distribution and one‟s judgment is the measure of bias, which can be defined as  
 
 
(6)                                  ln    )ln()ln(),(
111



n
j j
j
j
n
j
jj
n
j
jj
q
ppqpppqpB
  
 
which is the relative entropy function. It is always nonnegative and is zero if and only if each  
 
 
njpq jj  1                             ,  
 
In general, the bias will be smaller when qj is closer to pj.  
 
The value of judgment, the value of information and the measure of bias are related by the 
following equation 
 
 
(7)                                                        ln- )(ln )(ln
111



n
j j
j
j
n
j j
j
j
n
j j
j
j
q
ppr
ppr
qp  
 
This equation shows that the value of judgment is equal to the value of information minus the 
measure of bias.  
 
We will perform some simple calculations to illustrate the properties of the value of judgment and 
the measure of bias . For the simplicity of exposition, we will only consider events with two 
possible outcomes, state 1 and state 2, in the remaining part of the paper. Intuitively, we can think 
state 1 as the up market and state 2 as the down market.  First, we will assume the reference state 
is the equilibrium state, which is set to be {0.55, 0.45}. This means that it is more likely for the 
market to be up than down. We begin with the calculation of the value of a judgment that is the 
same as the equilibr ium state. From (3), the value of the judgment that agrees with the 
equilibrium state is 
 
045.0
45.0ln)1(55.0
55.0ln  pp
 
 
Hence the value of the judgment that agrees with the equilibrium state is zero, regardless of the 
actual probability distributions of the states. Intuitively speaking, an investor who agrees with the 
market does not believe he possesses valuable information and puts his money into an index fund. 
 
Now consider two random events with different probability distributions. Assume in the first 
event, the objective probability of state 1 is 65 % and the probability of state 2 is 35 %. Someone 
estimates the probability of state 1 is 57.5% and the probability of state 2 is 42.5%. We assume 
the equilibrium state remains {0.55, 0.45}. From (3), the value of his judgment is  
 
 
0089.045.0
425.0ln35.055.0
575.0ln65.0   
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 17 ---
 16 
From (6), the bias of this judgment is  
 
 
0117.0425.0
35.0ln35.0575.0
65.0ln65.0   
 
In the second event, the probability of state 1 is 57.5% and the probability of state 2 is 42.5%. 
Someone estimates the probability of state 1 is  57.5% and the probability of state 2 is 42.5%. 
From (3), the value of his judgment is  
 
 
0013.045.0
425.0ln425.055.0
575.0ln575.0   
 
while the bias of this judgment is zero. From the above calculation, the judgment that is more 
biased can be more valuable than a less biased  judgment under certain conditions . Intuitively 
speaking, an investor who is moderately favorable to a stock which turns out to earn very high 
rate of return will perform better than an investor who is moderately favorable to a stock which 
turns out to earn moderately rate of return. By separating value and bias of judgment, we will be 
able to perform more precise analysis to investor behaviors, which we will discuss later.  
 
Next, we will consider values of judgments when reference states are equilibrium a nd non -
equilibrium states respectively. Intuitively, we are comparing values of investment decisions 
when market settles down in equilibrium state or moves into a bubble state. Suppose an investor 
spot a good stock with high growth potential. Assume the ob jective probability of this stock to 
move up and down is {0.6, 0.4}. The investor‟s own assessment of the stock is {0.575, 0.425}. 
We will calculate the value of his judgment if the stock settles into the equilibrium state of {0.55, 
0.45} or a bubble state  {0.40, 0.60}, which means that the stock will have 40% chance going up 
and 60% chance going down the next time period.  
 
When the stock will settles into the equilibrium state, the value of judgment is  
 
 
0038.0)45.0
425.0ln(4.0)55.0
575.0ln(6.0   
 
When the stock will move into the bubble state, the value of the same judgment is 
 
 
0798.0)6.0
425.0ln(4.0)4.0
575.0ln(6.0        
 ⁭ 
The value of the judgment in a bubble state is much higher than the value of the same judgment 
in the equilibrium state. Intuitively, investors holding shares of a s tock benefit from the high 
stock price.   
 
There is much discussion about why misvaluation occurs and why arbitrage cannot eliminate 
misvaluation. Most of the discussion is based on the assumption of psychological biases of 
investors, especially small investors. Empirical evidences show that small investors are late stage 
momentum traders, following the trends generated by large, informed investors (Hvidkjaer 2006). 
The systematic biases generated by small investors are of small magnitude and are reversed o ver 
a very short period of time (Hvidkjaer 2008; Barber, Odean, and Zhu, 2009a, 2009b). However, 
many large scale profitable arbitrage activities, such as merger and acquisitions (Shleifer and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 18 ---
 17 
Vishny, 2003), require asset prices to be highly overvalued ove r extended periods. Most of the 
well informed about an asset are major stakeholders of the same asset. They often have an 
incentive as well as capacity to influence public opinion  to move asset prices along certain 
direction.  From the theory of judgment, the value of judgment and hence the value of investment 
depends on the reference state. Therefore  the informed may choose to sell an overpriced asset to 
realize an arbitrage profit or push  asset prices even higher to generate higher arbitrage profits. 
The above calculations indicate that it is much more valuable to generate asset bubbles than to 
realize profit immediately. The actual patterns of investment decisions by informed investors can 
be investigated in future empirical studies.  
 
More systematic dis cussion on the properties of the theory of judgment can be found in Chen 
(2008). In the next section, we will discuss the link between investors‟ judgment, the expected 
rate of return of their portfolios and their trading decisions.  
 
          ⁭ 
4. Value of Judgment, Expected Rate of Return of Portfolios and Investors’ Trading 
Decisions 
  
 
Investment decisions are made according to investors‟ judgment about stocks. To quantify the 
relation between investors‟ judgment and their trading decisions, we will co nsider a simple 
market with a risk free asset and a risky asset. The payoff of one unit risk free asset is 1+ r at the 
end of each time period. The payoffs of one unit risky asset can be either (1 + r)(1 + d) with 
probability p or (1+ r )(1 – d) with probab ility 1-p.  Investors can only assess the probabilities 
subjectively.   
 
Investors aim at maximizing  expected geometric return (Kelly, 1956; Latane and Tuttle, 1967).  
Based on the subjective assessment of the return distribution of the risky asset, an inv estor 
determines the optimal combination of the risk free asset and the risky asset in the portfolio. Then 
he can calculate the expected rate of return of this portfolio. Suppose an investor assesses the 
return distribution of the risky asset to be {q, 1 -q}. Assume the portfolio he constructed contains 
a portion x of risky asset and the remaining portion of 1 – x is risk free asset. The expected 
geometric return of the portfolio over the risk free rate is  
 
(8)                                                                    r))(1  1)1()1((
)1())1)(1()1)(1(())1)(1()1)(1((   
1
1




qq
qq
xdxd
rdrxrxdrxrx
 
To determine the value of x at which the portfolio will have the maximal rate of return, we 
differentiate the above formula with respect to x.  
 
)12()1()1(
)1)1()1((   
1
1
xdqxdxdd
xdxddx
d
qq
qq



  
The above differentiation equals zero when  
 
(9)                                                                                                     12
d
qx                                       
At this value of x, the portfolio obtains the highest expected geometric return. Plug the value of x 
into (8), the expected rate of return over the risk free rate is  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 19 ---
 18 
 
)1)(1)1(2(
)1)(1))12(1()121((   
1
1
rqq
rqq
qq
qq



  
If the objective return distribution of the risky asset is {p, 1 -p} inst ead of the subjectively 
assessed {q, 1 -q}, the expected rate of return of the portfolio over the risk free rate, without 
considering the factor 1+r, is  
 (10)                                                                                          1)1(2 1   pp qq
 
The first order approximation of (10) is 
 
2ln)1ln()1(ln
))1(2ln(    1

 
qpqp
qq pp  
Comparing the above result with (5 ), we find that the first order approximation of the expected 
rate of return of the portfolio constructed from a certain judgment is exactly equal to the value of 
the judgment. This result is an extension from Kelly (1956). As the value of judgment provides a 
good approximation to the rate of return on investment, it can be conveniently used to understand 
the relation between human judgment and patterns in investment returns and stock market.  
 
From (9), the judgment about a stock determines the level of holding about the stock. The change 
of judgment about a stock determines the volume of trading in the market, which is considered as 
the key ingredient missing from the asset pricing models (Banerjee and Kremer, 2010). The 
theory of judgment provides a link between investors‟ judgment and trading volume in the asset 
market, which will be applied to understand cycles of trading in the next section. In the following, 
we will apply the theory to calculate several numerical examples on the le vel of holding of risky 
assets. 
 
When interest rate is measured on the inflation adjusted basis, the risk free interest rate can be set 
to be zero as a good approximation to reality. The payoffs of one unit risky asset can be either 1 + 
d with probability p or 1 – d with probability 1 -p.   We can calibrate the equilibrium value of p 
and d with the empirical data on return and standard deviation. The arithmetic mean rate of return 
of the risky asset is  
 
 
(11)                                                                         )12())(1( dpdppd   
 
and the standard deviation of the risky asset is 
 
 
(12)        )1(2   }1)d]-(2p-p)(-d)-p)[(1-(1])12([{ 1/222 ppddppdp    
 
respectively. Setting p = 0.55 and d = 0.25 results mean rate of return to be 2.5% and standard 
deviation to be 24.87%, which are similar to actual real rate of return and standard deviation of 
many stock markets in the world in the last ten years. With p = 0.55 and d = 0.25, the proportion 
of risky asset in the equilibrium portfolio, following formula (9), is 
 
 
4.025.0
155.0212 
d
p  
 
These numbers will be regarded as default values of an equilibrium portfolio in the next section.   
 
Different people at different times in different places may have different opinions about the future 
of the stock markets. We will calculate the proportions of asset to be allocated to the risky asset  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 20 ---
 19 
with different expectations. When p is equal to 57.5%, 60%, 62.5% while keeping d fixed at 0.25, 
the optimal allocations to risky asset are 
 
 
  
0.125.0
1625.02
8.025.0
160.02
6.025.0
1575.02


  
 
while the arithmetic means of the risky asset, following formula (11), are 
  
 
%25.625.0)1625.02(
%525.0)16.02(
%75.325.0)1575.02(


  
 
The real returns of the best performing stock markets in the worlds, such as United States, over 
the second half of the last century are close to or above 6.25%. This justifies the standard 
statement of high risk, high return and the common pract ice of allocating most or all assets in 
risky securities in long term investments. However, if the future expected real returns of risky 
assets are lower, the proportions of risky assets in investment portfolios should be lower as well 
to achieve high expected returns (McEnally, 1986).   
 
In the above discussion, we assume a risky asset makes only two discrete movements with 
corresponding probabilities. In reality, a risky asset can make many different movements with 
corresponding probabilities. The numerical representation by (p, d) , just like mean and variance,  
is a simplified characteristic on the movements of the risky asset.    
 
 
5. Investor Heterogeneity in Information Processing and Related Market Patterns 
  
 
In this section, we will apply the theory of judgment to build a simple model to study trading 
behaviors of the heterogeneous investors and the resulting market patterns. First we will 
determine the statistical distribution of investors with different levels of wealth. From earlier 
studies, such a s those in Chatterjee, Yarlagadda and Chakrabarti (2005), wealth distribution 
follows exponential law as a first approximation. Investors can be classified based on their 
wealth. Suppose each investor in group i has i unit of wealth. Since the number of in vestors in 
each group of wealth follows the exponential law, the proportion of investors with i unit of wealth 
is  
 
i2
1  
Since  
 
12
1
1


i
i  
the proportion of investor population is normalized. The total wealth of the economy is 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 21 ---
 20 
 
221


i
i
i  
Because the investor population is normalized, the average wealth of an investor is 2.  
 
From calculation, the Gini coefficient of this model economy is 33.3. The Gini coefficients of 
industrialized economies are roughly between 25 and 45. So the wealth distribution in this model 
economy is representative of real economies.  
 
To further simplify discussion, we lump investors into three groups. The representative wealth for 
each member of the three groups of investors are 1, 4 and 9 respectively. The proportions of three 
groups of investors are determined by maximum entropy principle (Jaynes, 1957) with the 
constraints on total wealth 
 
(13)                                                                                     294
1
321
321


ppp
ppp  
Solving the maximum entropy problem  
 
)lnlnlnmax{ 332211 pppppp   
subjecting to the constraints (12) gives the following answer 
 
04.0
23.0
73.0
3
2
1



p
p
p  
The total wealth for each group of investors are 
 
33.09
95.04
73.01
33
22
11



pw
pw
pw  
Roughly speaking, small investors with 1 unit of wealth represent individual investors. Empirical 
evidence shows that individual investors as a group lose money from their trading activities. So 
we will assume small investors do not possess private information. They base their trading 
decisions on past price movements and other public information. Empirical evidences show that 
large investors as a group make money from their trading activities.  We assume the value of 
judgment from m idsized investors with 4 unit of wealth is moderately positive and the value of 
judgment from large investors with 9 unit of weal th is significantly positive. The specific values 
of judgment by different investors will be quantified in the next paragraph.  
 
From calculations performed in the last section, the equilibrium levels of p, d and the average 
proportion of risky asset held by an investor are 0.55, 0.24 and 0.4 respectively. However, from 
time to time, the probability of price movement of the risky asset will deviate from the 
equilibrium level because of various reasons. Investors with higher wealth level can detect more 
valuable information. Specifically, we assume large investors with 9 unit of wealth can detect all 
information {p, 1-p} with p up to 0.6 and midsized investors with 4 unit of wealth can detect all 
information {p, 1-p} with p up to 0.575.  
 
We follow the standa rd literature on the assumptions of price movement of securities. The price 
of the risk free asset is assumed to be constant. The price movement of the risky asset is 
proportional to net active trading by the investors , except at the time of public release  of 
information, when price can move without trading.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 22 ---
 21 
Now we consider a trading process that lasts for four time periods. At the beginning of period 
one, the firm underlying the risky security starts a new project. The earning from this project will 
become known to the public at the end of period two. This new project is expected to generate 
profit that corresponds to a payoff in security that is either 1 + d with probability 0.6 or 1– d with 
probability 0.4 in one time period  if information is publicly r evealed. This expected payoff is 
higher than the equilibrium payoff of either 1 + d with probability 0.55 or 1 – d with probability 
0.45. Large investors with 9 unit of wealth detect this information and purchase additional shares 
of the risky security. The  proportion of wealth they invest in the risky security after the 
purchasing, according to formula (9),  is   
 
 
8.025.0
16.0212 
d
p  
 
Since the total wealth of this group of investors is  
 
 
33.03 w  
 
The total volume of buying, which is the new holding minus the equilibrium holding at 40%, is  
 
 
13.0)4.08.0(33.0   
 
The purchasing by large investor increases the price of the shares and reduces the future expected 
returns. When the price increases to a certain level, this security will be represented by a state of 
future payoff that is either 1 + d with probability 0.575 or 1 – d with probability 0.425 by the end 
of period two. This is the end of period one and the beginning of period two. In period two, 
midsized investors with 4 unit of wealth detect this information and purchase shares of the risky 
security. The proportion of wealth they invest in the risky security, according to formula (9), is   
 
 
6.025.0
1575.0212 
d
p  
 
Since the total wealth of the midsized investors is  
 
 
95.02 w  
 
The total volume of their buying, which is the new holding minus the equilibrium holding at 40%, 
is  
 
 
19.0)4.06.0(95.0   
 
In period two, large investors with 9 unit of wealth will also keep sixty percent of their wealth in 
the risky asset. As a result, they will reduce the original holding. The total volume of their selling 
is  
 
 
066.0)8.06.0(33.0   
 
At the end of period two, the earning from the project becomes publicly known and the share 
price of the risky asset fully reflects t he underlying fundamentals. Small investors with 1 unit of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 23 ---
 22 
wealth do not possess private information. Instead, they observe that both the share price 
movement in the last two time peri ods and the earning announced  at the end of period two  are 
higher than t he average. They extrapolate the past results to the future and invest accordingly. 
Because the share prices have moved up steadily over the last two time periods, it will be natural 
for small investors to base the trading decisions on the best trading dec isions from two periods 
earlier. Specifically, in period three, on average, small investors will allocate eighty percent of 
their assets in the risky security. Since total wealth for the small investors is  
 
 
73.01 w  
 
The total volume of bu ying by the small investors, which is the new holding minus the 
equilibrium holding at 40%, is 
 
 
29.0)4.08.0(73.0   
 
Now we will consider the trading activities of large and midsized investors. Their trading 
decisions are based on the information they  received. By default, we assume no new information 
in the future. In this case, the movement of stock price will return to its equilibrium condition. As 
a result, the holdings of the risky asset by large and midsized investors will return to the 
equilibrium state of forty percent. The total amount they will sell is 
 
 
25.0)6.04.0()95.033.0(   
 
The net active trading by all investors is 
 
 
(14)                                                                                         04.025.029.0    
 
Because of the small net active trading in period three, the price movement in this period is 
moderate. However, trading at the beginning of period three could be dominated by small 
investors who mainly depend on easy to understand information, such as earning data, which is 
distributed widely to the general public at very narrow time frames. So trad ing by small investors 
is highly correlated (Barber, Odean and Zhu, 2009b). Trading decisions by large and mid size 
investors depend more on intangible information, which is the main determinant of future returns 
(Daniel and Titman, 2006). But intangible i nformation is less precisely defined and trading 
activities generated by intangible information is less concentrated. This means that the beginning 
of the period three is marked by rise of asset prices while prices decline over the rest of period 
three. This is consistent with the empirical evidence (Hvidkjaer 2008; Barber, Odean, and Zhu, 
2009a, 2009b). 
 
In period four, most relevant information has been acted upon and share price will finally reach 
equilibrium. Since share price at the end of period two h as already fully reflect the fundamentals, 
the expected price level at the end of period four will be equal to the share price at the end of 
period two. Therefore, the combined net active trading of period three and four should b e zero. 
From (14 ), the net active trading in period four should be -0.04. Since large and midsized 
investors already balanced their portfolio to equilibrium state in period three, the active trading is 
mainly generated by small investors who are reducing their holding from last period‟s buying. As 
there is little new information to generate extra trading, the total trading can be approximated by 
the net active trading.  
 
We can summarize the trading activities in the four time periods into the following table: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 24 ---
 23 
 
 Period one Period two Period three Period four 
Net trading 0.13 0.12 0.04 -0.04 
Trading volume 0.13 0.19 0.29 0.04 
 
 
The average net trading of the four periods is 
 
 
06.0)04.004.012.013.0(4
1   
 
Since the net trading of the first two periods are higher than the average, share p rices increase in 
the first two periods are higher than the average. They are the winner periods. In the last two 
periods, the net trading is lower than the average. Share prices change in the last two periods are 
lower than the average. They are the loser periods. Among the winner periods, the trading volume 
of the first period is lower than that of the second period. Among the loser periods, the trading 
volume of the fourth period is lower than that of the third period. The four trading periods can be 
summarized as  
 
Period one Period two Period three Period four 
Low volume winner High volume winner High volume loser Low volume loser 
 
This is exactly the same as the empirical pattern documented in Lee and Swaminathan (2000), 
which they call momentum life cycle.  
 
Hvidkjaer (2006) examined the trading behaviors of investors of different sizes at the stages of 
low volume winner, high volume winner, high volume loser and low volume loser. He inferred 
the background of investors from the sizes of the trades. In his classification, large trades are two 
times or more as large as small trades. In our model, the midsized and large investors are four and 
nine times larger than the small investors. So it is natural to merge the midsized and large 
investors into one group as large investors when comparing our theoretical predictions to the 
empirical results documented in Hvidkjaer (2006). We will examine how trading patterns 
predicted from our model correspond to empirical patterns. The clearest resemblance between the 
predictions of our model and the empirical patterns occur in high volume loser stage. From Figure 
2 of Hvidkjaer (2006), small investors are active buyers while large investors are active sellers in 
this stage, which is exactly what the model has predict ed. Our results are also consistent with 
Feng and Seasholes (2004), who showed that informed investors are selling while uninformed 
investors are buying after information release. In the low volume loser stage, from Figure 3 of 
Hvidkjaer (2006), small investors are more active sellers than large investors. In the low volume 
and high volume winner stages, from Figure 2 and 3 of Hvidkjaer (2006), large investors are 
more active buyers than small investors. If we interpret trading activities calculated from ou r 
model as dominate activities instead of all activities, the predictions of our model during these 
stages are consistent with the empirical patterns.  
 
Alternatively, we can refine the model to make it more realistic. We had assumed the level of 
informedness of an investor is determined only by his wealth. To be more consistent with reality, 
we now assume the level of informedness of an investor is positively correlated but not 
determined by his wealth. Specifically, the correlation between wealth and leve l of informedness 
is represented by the following matrix 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 25 ---
 24 
 0.55 0.575 0.60 
1 0.7 0.2 0.1 
2 0.15 0.7 0.15 
3 0.1 0.2 0.7 
 
This means that among investors with one unit of wealth, 70%, are uninformed, as 0.55 is the 
equilibrium state, 20% are informed at the level of 0.575 and 10% are informed at the level of 
0.60. The level of informedness of group two and three investors can be understood similarly.  
 
We make a further refinement about the informedness of investors who can detect the information 
{p, 1 -p} with p up to 0.6. We will assume these investors detect the information but do not 
interpret the information precisely. To be more specific, these investors make a judgment that p is 
equal to 0.575 instead of 0.6. This is very natural since most investors  underestimate the 
significant of new information. Note that the judgment of this group of investors is still more 
valuable than the group of investors who estimate p to be 0.575 when it is actually 0.575. With 
the refined model, we can recalculate the tra ding activities following the same procedure as 
before. But this time we will measure the trading activities of large investors and small investors 
separately. The calculation of net trading by small and large investors at period four is determined 
by the proportional holdings of small and large investors at the end of period three. The results 
are shown in the following table.  
 
 
 Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 
small investor net trading  0.0145 0.0291 0.1600 -0.0076 
large investor net trading  0.0742 0.1455 -0.1498 -0.0026 
total net trading 0.0887 0.1746 0.0102 -0.0102 
trading volume 0.0887 0.1746 0.2735 0.0102 
 
From the above table,  the trading patterns of small and large investors calculated in each period 
are qualitatively similar to the empirical patterns recorded in Figure 2 and 3 of Hvidkjaer (2006). 
However, we would not expect the patterns predicted from our model to be identical to empirical 
patterns collected in the literature. Our model presents an investment cycle initiated by a positi ve 
information signal. The empirical patterns are combinations of all kinds of cycle and non -cycle 
activities. For example, when the news is negative, a similar pattern exists at opposite directions. 
Different cycles have different amplitudes and length. I n the future, we may conduct empirical 
investigations by filtering out different cycle and non -cycle components. This could help detect 
investment strategies with high level of returns.  
  
This theory of judgment based model captured many stylized patterns  of trading activities during 
the momentum reversal cycle. The mathematics involved is vey simple and the intuition from the 
model is very clear. However, it is still in an early stage of development. Many refinements can 
be made in the future, some of which are listed as follows.  
 
First, relation between earning momentum and price momentum can be added into the model. 
Empirical evidence shows strong relation between earning and price movement (Lee and 
Swaminathan, 2000; Chordia and Shivakumar, 2006; Chen, Moise and Zhao, 2009). By modeling 
earning process over several periods of time, we can further clarify the trading mechanisms of 
small investors. If earning trends last longer, small investors, as well as other investors, will be 
more confident that the momentum will continue.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 26 ---
 25 
Second, informed investors can anticipate and influence the trading activities of uninformed 
investors. When informed investors can anticipate the trading behaviors of uninformed investors, 
they may base their trading decisions no t only on the fundamental information, but also on the 
expected trading activities of uninformed investors. Informed investors, who usually have strong 
track records and are major stakeholders of publicly listed companies, can influence uninformed 
investors in certain ways to alter the trajectories of price movement to benefit themselves. These 
investor activities may be captured by more refined models.  
 
    
6. Concluding Remarks 
 
 
This paper presents an updated version of the entropy theory of human mind.  Comparing with 
other quantitative theories in behavioral finance,  which are mostly utility theories in one form or 
another, the entropy theory of mind is natural, simple, specific and intuitive. The entropy theory 
of mind is a natural extension from the e ntropy theory of information and statistical mechanics. 
The mathematical tools of the entropy theory of mind only involve simple algebraic functions 
such as logarithm functions and occasional use of calculus. The predictions derived from entropy 
theory of mind are more specific than from other theories. The links between investors‟ 
information processing and trading decisions are very intuitive under the entropy theory of mind.  
 
Given many advantages of the entropy theory of mind over the utility theory, o ne may naturally 
ask why the concept of entropy only has very limited applications in social sciences. The question 
even attracted people from outside academia. Writer Poundstone devoted two books to examine 
the historical development of the concepts of ut ility and entropy and their relations with human 
mind and investment (Poundstone, 2005, 2010). Academic research, like all other social 
activities, is constrained by institutional structures. The concept of utility was introduced into 
economic research much earlier than the concept of entropy. It is always difficult to compete with 
a well established theory. We can only hope, through the dedicated efforts from people both 
inside and outside academia, the potential of entropy theory, which has catalyzed many , if not 
most, scientific breakthroughs in the last one and half centuries, can be further explored in the 
field of social sciences.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 27 ---
 26 
 
 
References 
 
Banerjee, Snehal and Kremer, Ilan, 2010, Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns of 
Trade, Journal of Finance, Forthcoming  
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common 
stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806 
Barber, Brad, and Terra nce Odean, 2008, All that Glitters: The  Effect of Attention and News on 
the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors, The Review of Financial 
Studies . Vol. 21, 2, 785-818. 
Barber, Brad, Odean, Terrance and Zhu, Ning, 2009a,  Do Retail Trades Move Markets?, Review 
of Financial Studies, 22, 1, 151-186. 
Barber, Brad, Odean, Terrance and Zhu, Ning, 2009b, Systematic Noise, Journal of Financial 
Markets, 12, 547-569. 
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment, 
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-345. 
Beutelspacher, Albrecht. 1994. Cryptology: an introduction to the art and science of 
enciphering, … Mathematical Association of America. 
Boone, J. V. 2005, A brief history of cryptology, Naval Institute Press. 
Brav, Alon and Heaton, J.B. , 2002, Competing Theories of Financial Anomalies , The Review of 
Financial Studies, 15, No. 2, 575-606. 
Chatterjee, Arnab; Yarlagadda, Sudhakar; Chakrabarti, Bikas K. 2005, Econophysics of Wealth 
Distributions, Springer;   
Chen, Jing, 2003, An Entropy Theo ry of Psychology and  its Implication to Behavioral Finance, 
Financiële Studievereniging Rotterdam Forum, 6, No. 1, 26- 31 
Chen, Jing, 2004, Generalized Entropy Theory of Information and Market Patterns, Corporate 
Finance Review, 9, No. 3, 23- 32. 
Chen, Jing, 2005, The physical foundation of economics: An analytical thermodynamic theory, 
World Scientific, Singapore. 
Chen, Jing, 2007 , The Informational Theory of Investment: A Comparison with Behavioral 
Theories, ICFAI Journal of Behavioral Finance, 4, No. 1, 6 – 31 
Chen, Jing, 2008, The Physical Foundation of the Mind, NeuroQuantology, 6, No. 3, 222-233 
Chen, Hsiu-Lang,  Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and  Russ Wermers, 2000,The Value of Active Mutual 
Fund Management: An Examination of the Stockholdings and Trades of f und managers, 
Journal of Financial & Quantitative Analysis 35, 343-368. 
Chen, Long, Claudia Moise and Xinlei Zhao, 2009, Myopic Extrapolation, Price Momentum, and 
Price Reversal, working paper.    
Chordia, Tarun and Lakshmanan Shivakumar, 2006, Earnings an d Price Momentum,  Journal of 
Financial Economics 80, 627-656. 
Cohen, Randolpg, Paul Gompers, and Toumo Vuolteenaho, 2002, Who underreact to cash -flow 
news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions, Journal of Financial 
Economics 66, 409-462. 
Cover, Thomas and Joy Thomas, 2006, Elements of information theory, 2nd edition, Wiley, 
Hoboken, NJ.  
Cronqvist, Henrik and Thaler, Richard, 2004, Design choice in privatized social-security systems: 
learning from the Swedish experience, American Economic Review, 94, 424-428 
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investment psychology 
and Security market under and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 28 ---
 27 
DANIEL, K. and TITMAN, S. (2006), Market Reactions to Tangible a nd Intangible Information. 
The Journal of Finance, 61: 1605–1643.  
DeBondt, Werner and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact? Journal of 
Finance 40, 793-805. 
Einstein A. 1905 (1989), On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production an d 
Transformation of Light. In The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein , Volume 2, 
Princeton University Press,  
Engelberg, Joseph and Christopher Parsons, 2009 , The Causal Impact of Media in Financial 
Markets, Working paper 
Feng, Lei and Seasholes, Mark, (20 04) Correlated trading and location, Journal of Finance , 59, 
2117-2144.  
Feng, Lei and Seasholes, Mark, (2005) Do Investor Sophistication and Trading Experience 
Eliminate Behavioral Biases in Finance Markets? Review of Finance, 9, 305-351.  
Friston, Karl, (2010) The fre e-energy pr inciple: a unified brain theory?  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 11, February, 127-138  
Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas, 1971. The entropy law and the economic process . Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Gibbs, J. Willard, 1873a (1906), Graphical methods in the thermodynamics of fluids, Collected in 
Scientific papers of J. Willard Gibbs, Ox Bow Press 
Gibbs, J. Willard, 1873b (1906), A method of geometrical representation  of the thermodynamic 
properties of substances by means of surfaces, Collected in Scientific papers of J. Willard 
Gibbs, Ox Bow Press 
Gibbs, J. Willard, 1902 (1981), Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics , Ox Bow Press, 
Woodbridge, Connecticut.  
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underre action, momentum trading 
and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.  
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2006, A trade -based analysis of momentum, Review of Financial Studies 19, 
no. 2, 457–491. 
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2008, Small trades and the cross -section of stock returns, Review of Financial 
Studies 21, no. 3, 1123–1151. 
Jablonka, Eva and Lamb, Marion J. (2006) Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, 
Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life ,The MIT Press  
Jammer, Max, 1966, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2nd ed 
Jaynes ET. 1957, Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics, Physical Review, 106: 620-630  
Jaynes, E. T., 1988, `How Does the Brain Do Plausible Reasoning?', in Maximum-Entropy and 
Bayesian Methods in Science and Engineering,  1, 1-24, G. J. Erickson and C. R. Smith 
(eds.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, 
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: 
Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91. 
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of 
actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance, 60, 1983-2011. 
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: A analys is of decision under risk, 
Econometica 47, 263-291.  
Kelly, J. L., Jr. (1956), "A New Interpretation of Information Rate", Bell System Technical 
Journal 35: 917–926  
Kullback, Solomon,  1959, Information theory and statistics, John Wiley 
Latane, Henry, 1959, Criteria for choice among risky ventures, The Journal of Political Economy, 
67, 2, 144-155. 
Latane, Henry and Tuttle, Donald, 1967, Criteria for portfolio building, Journal of Finance , 22, 
359-373 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526


--- PAGE 29 ---
 28 
Lee, Charles and Bhaskaran Swamminathan, 2000, Price momentum and trading volume, Journal 
of Finance 55, 2017-2069. 
Maor, Eli, 1994, e: the story of a number, Princeton University press.  
Maxwell, James, 1871, Theory of heat,  (Green & Co., Longmans, London) 
McEnally, Richard W., 1986, Latane's Bequest: The Best of Portfolio Strategies,  The Journal of 
Portfolio Management, 12:21-30. 
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2009, Is Momentum Really Momentum? , Journal of Financial Economics , 
forthcoming. 
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do Investors Trade Too Much, American Economic Review  89, 1279-
1298.  
Patterson, Scott, 2010,  The Quants: How a New Breed of Math Whizzes Conquered Wall Street 
and Nearly Destroyed It   Crown Business;   
Poundstone, William, 2005, Fortune's Formula: The Untold Story of the Scientific Betting System 
That Beat the Casinos and Wall Street, Hill and Wang 
Poundstone, William, 2010,  Priceless: The Myth of Fair Value (and How to Take Advantage of 
It).  Hill and Wang  
Qian, Hong, 2001, Relative entropy: Free energy associated with equilibrium fluctuations and 
non-equilibrium deviations, Physical Review E, 63, 042103.  
Qian, Hong, 2009, Entropy Demystified: The „„Thermo‟‟ -dynamics of Stochastically Fluctuating 
Systems, in Methods in Enzymology, Volume 467, Computer Methods, Part B , Edited by 
Michal Johnson and Ludwig Brand, 112-134. 
Rando, Ol iver J.  
 and
  Verstrepen, Kevin J., 2007 ,  Timescales of Genetic and Epigenetic 
Inheritance, Cell, Volume 128, Issue 4, 655-668 
Samuelson, Paul, 1969, Portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming, The Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 51, 3, 239-246 
Samuelson, Paul. 1972. The collected scientific papers, Vol. 3,  Cambridge,Mass.: MIT  Press.  
Schlögl, Friedrich, 1989,  Probability and heat : fundamentals of thermostatistics,  Braunschweig 
: F. Vieweg,   
Shannon, Claude, 1948, A mathematical theory of communication . The Bell System Technical 
Journal,  27,  379-423, 623-656. 
Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication , Urbana: The 
University of Illinois Press. 
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of 
Financial Economics 70, 295-311. 
Sinn, Hans -Werner, 2003 W eber‟s law and the biological evolution of risk preferences: The 
selective dominance of the logarithmic utility function, The Geneva Papers on Risk and 
Insurance Theory 28, 87-100; 
Stevens SS, 1961, To Honor Fechner and Repeal His Law: A power function, not a log function, 
describes the operating characteristic of a sensory system. Science. 133 (3446), 80-6. 
Stigler, Stephen, 1986, The history of statistics: The measurement of uncertainty before 1900 , 
The Belknap Press.  
Thorp, Edward O. 1997, The Kelly criterion in blackjack, sports betting and the stock market, 
presented at: The 10th International Conference on Gambling and Risk Taking Montreal.     
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, 
Science 185, 1124-1131. 
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock -picking 
talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655-1703. 
  
 
 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1734526